SOLR-14560: Interleaving for Learning To Rank (#1571)
apache/lucene-solr: solr/solr-ref-guide/src/learning-to-rank.adoc

  }}
----

=== Running a Rerank Query Interleaving Two Models

To rerank the results of a query, interleaving two models (myModelA, myModelB) add the `rq` parameter to your search, passing two models in input, for example:

[source,text]
http://localhost:8983/solr/techproducts/query?q=test&rq={!ltr model=myModelA model=myModelB reRankDocs=100}&fl=id,score

> To obtain the model that interleaving picked for a search result, computed during reranking, add `[interleaving]` to the `fl` parameter, for example:

Reviewer: question: if myModelA had `[ doc1, doc2, doc3 ]` document order and myModelB had `[ doc1, doc3, doc2 ]` document order i.e. there was agreement between the models re: the first document, will `[interleaving]` return (1) randomly `myModelA` or `myModelB` depending on how the picking actually happened or will it return (2) something else e.g. `myModelA,myModelB` (if myModelA actually picked and myModelB agreed) or `myModelB,myModelA` (if myModelB actually picked and myModelA agreed) or will it return (3) neither since in a way neither of them picked the document since they both agreed on it?

answer-ish: from recalling the implementation the answer is (1) i think though from a user's perspective perhaps it might be nice here to clarify here somehow around that? a subtle aspect being (if i understand things right) that `[features]` and `[interleaving]` could both be requested in the `fl` and whilst myModelA and myModelB might have agreed that `doc1` should be the first document they might have used very different features to arrived at that conclusion and their `score` value could also differ.

Author: 1 is what is currently implemented and it aligns with the TeamDraft Interleaving papers and evaluation methods.
Your observation is interesting though, but to implement that we should invent a new type of Interleaving algorithm that will do that when interleaving the results and will evaluate the user clicks accordingly later on.

Your observation on the features to log applies as well.
So far  no change is needed in this regard in my opinion.

[source,text]
http://localhost:8983/solr/techproducts/query?q=test&rq={!ltr model=myModelA model=myModelB reRankDocs=100}&fl=id,score,[interleaving]

The output XML will include the model picked for each search result, resembling the output shown here:

[source,json]
----
{
  "responseHeader":{
    "status":0,
    "QTime":0,
    "params":{
      "q":"test",
      "fl":"id,score,[interleaving]",
      "rq":"{!ltr model=myModelA model=myModelB reRankDocs=100}"}},
  "response":{"numFound":2,"start":0,"maxScore":1.0005897,"docs":[
      {
        "id":"GB18030TEST",
        "score":1.0005897,
        "[interleaving]":"myModelB"},
      {
        "id":"UTF8TEST",
        "score":0.79656565,
        "[interleaving]":"myModelA"}]
  }}
----

=== Running a Rerank Query Interleaving a model with the original ranking
When approaching Search Quality Evaluation with interleaving it may be useful to compare a model with the original ranking. 

> To rerank the results of a query, interleaving a model with the original ranking, add the `rq` parameter to your search, with a model in input and activating the original ranking interleaving, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To rerank the results of a query, interleaving a model with the original ranking, add the `rq` parameter to your search, passing the special inbuilt `_OriginalRanking_` model identifier as one model and your comparison model as the other model, for example:
```

[source,text]

> http://localhost:8983/solr/techproducts/query?q=test&rq={!ltr model=myModel model=_OriginalRanking_ reRankDocs=100}&fl=id,score

Reviewer: subjective: might `model=_OriginalRanking_ model=myModel` be more intuitive i.e. the 'from' baseline model on the left and the 'to' alternative model on the right? (i recall that the code had an "original ranking last" assumption before but if that's gone there's a possibility here to swap the order)

Author: Just fixed that, it's not critical as the order is not important, but if it's more readable, let's go for it!

> http://localhost:8983/solr/techproducts/query?q=test&rq={!ltr model=myModel interleaveOriginalRanking=true reRankDocs=100}&fl=id,score

Reviewer: 13/n minor: `interleaveOriginalRanking=true` --> `model=_OriginalRanking_` assuming we're going with that special value

</transformer>
----

* Declaration of the `[interleaving]` transformer.
+
[source,xml]
----
<transformer name="interleaving" class="org.apache.solr.ltr.response.transform.LTRInterleavingTransformerFactory">

> </transformer>

Reviewer: minor/subjective: could shorten since there's no parameters

```
<transformer name="interleaving" class="org.apache.solr.ltr.response.transform.LTRInterleavingTransformerFactory"/>
```

* "Learning to Rank in Solr" presentation at Lucene/Solr Revolution 2015 in Austin:
** Slides: http://www.slideshare.net/lucidworks/learning-to-rank-in-solr-presented-by-michael-nilsson-diego-ceccarelli-bloomberg-lp
** Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M7BKwJoh96s

> 

Reviewer: We've got _"... Contributions for further models, features and normalizers are welcome. ..."_ above, any thoughts on adding "interleaving algorithms" to that list?
